Release briefing 4.6 (#125)
kokkos/kokkos-tutorials: Content/ReleaseBriefings/4_6/Section_GeneralEnhancements.tex

%==========================================================================

\begin{frame}[fragile]

  {\Huge General Enhancements}

  \vspace{10pt}

\end{frame}

%==========================================================================

% Examples

% note: always keep the [fragile] for your frames!

%\begin{frame}[fragile]{Example list}
%  \begin{itemize}
%      \item Item 1
%      \item Item 2 with some \texttt{code}
%      \begin{itemize}
%        \item Sub-item 2.1
%        \item Sub-item 2.2
%      \end{itemize}
%  \end{itemize}
%\end{frame}

%\begin{frame}[fragile]{Example code}
%    \begin{code}[keywords={std}]
%        #include <iostream>
%        
%        int main() {
%            std::cout << "hello world\n";
%        }
%    \end{code}
%\end{frame}

%\begin{frame}[fragile]{Example table}
%    \begin{center}
%        \begin{tabular}{l|l}
%            a & b \\\hline
%            c & d
%        \end{tabular}
%    \end{center}
%\end{frame}

%==========================================================================

\begin{frame}[fragile]{Fix a warning from kokkos\_check}
 \begin{itemize}

>     \item \texttt{kokkos\_check}: Check at configure time that Kokkos was built with the requested backends and target architectures. Throws a fatal error otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item \texttt{kokkos\_check}: Check at configure time that Kokkos was built with the requested backends and target architectures.
```
Not necessarily true, we support passing `RETURN_VALUE TheResult`

Author: @tpadioleau

>     \item Fix a warning when a user calls the cmake function \texttt{kokkos\_check} from a \texttt{<PackageName>Config.cmake} file

Reviewer: I think the import keywords are "Find Module"
```suggestion
    \item Fix a warning when a user calls the cmake function \texttt{kokkos\_check} from a \texttt{<PackageName>Config.cmake} "Find Module" file
```

    {\tiny \begin{verbatim}
CMake Warning (dev) at /usr/share/cmake-3.22/Modules/FindPackageHandleStandardArgs.cmake:438 (message):
  The package name passed to `find_package_handle_standard_args`
  (Kokkos_DEVICES) does not match the name of the calling package (SomePackage).
  This can lead to problems in calling code that expects `find_package`
  result variables (e.g., `_FOUND`) to follow a certain pattern.
Call Stack (most recent call first):
  ... /kokkos/lib/cmake/Kokkos/KokkosConfigCommon.cmake:110 (find_package_handle_standard_args)
  ...
This warning is for project developers.  Use -Wno-dev to suppress it.
    \end{verbatim}}
 \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]{\texttt{inclusive\_scan} performance improvements}
  With the Cuda and HIP backends, \texttt{Kokkos::Experimental::inclusive\_scan} now calls the vendor versions in Thrust
  \begin{itemize}
     \item The vendor versions are faster than the \texttt{Kokkos::parallel\_scan}-based default implementation
     \item Thrust requires \texttt{Kokkos\_ENABLE\_ROCTHRUST} to be \texttt{ON} (which is the default)

>   \end{itemize}

Reviewer: Any performance number to mention here?
Ping https://github.com/science-enthusiast

Author: @science-enthusiast

Reviewer 2: | Benchmark | Earlier: Nvidia V100	| Earlier: AMD MI300A | Now: Nvidia V100 | Now: AMD MI300A |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| std::uint64_t, Default sum | 0.005 s | 0.002 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |
| std::int64_t, Default sum | 0.005 s | 0.002 s | 0.002 s | 0.001 s |
| double, Default sum | 0.005 s | 0.002 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |
| std::uint64_t, SumFunctor | 0.009 s | 0.003 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |
| std::int64_t, SumFunctor | 0.009 s | 0.003 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |
| double, SumFunctor | 0.009 s | 0.003 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |
| std::uint64_t, MaxFunctor | 0.009 s | 0.003 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |
| std::int64_t, MaxFunctor | 0.009 s | 0.003 s | 0.002 s | 0.001 s |
| Double, MaxFunctor | 0.009 s | 0.003 s | 0.003 s | 0.001 s |

Reviewer 3: Based on what we presented to our demonstrators it is 1.5 to 3 times faster, I'll update the slide.
I'll see tomorrow if he had other numbers

Author: do we have these numbers in `ms` ?

Reviewer 2: Currently the resolution is set to seconds in a source file inside `core/unit_test`.  A FIXME is already in place. The numbers can be separately generated with better resolution if needed.

Author: ok, then we just say ~1.5-3x faster for the release briefing?

Author: added in https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-tutorials/pull/125/commits/f2125d0846d1f748f7c09255b6ef4b9d455c1744

\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]{Reduce tooling interface overhead}
  Reduced the overhead of Kokkos tools related checks
  \begin{itemize}
      \item Store the information whether Kokkos tools are enabled after each modification to the tools' callbacks
      \item Previously, this value was recomputed for every event (\texttt{parallel\_for}, \texttt{fence}, etc.)
      \item Most noticeable in small serial kernels (around 100 elements)
  \end{itemize}

> \end{frame}

Reviewer: Same here any perf number we can show
When does it matter, when does it not
cc @PaulGannay

Reviewer 4: Before change:
'''-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                   Time             CPU   Iterations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
ParallelFor_NoOverhead                       13.3 ns         13.3 ns     53314075'''
After change:
'''-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                   Time             CPU   Iterations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
ParallelFor_NoOverhead                       2.59 ns         2.59 ns    269613110'''
For kernel doing no work.

Reviewer 4: Before change:
```-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                   Time             CPU   Iterations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
ParallelFor_NoOverhead                       13.3 ns         13.3 ns     53314075
```
After change:
```
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                   Time             CPU   Iterations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
ParallelFor_NoOverhead                       2.59 ns         2.59 ns    269613110
```
For kernel doing no work.

Author: added in https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-tutorials/pull/125/commits/2fafc0a242f0b6dc285e8c91824124f7b3218cc0

%==========================================================================
\begin{frame}[fragile]{SIMD reductions and compound assignments}
  Added reductions and remaining compound assignments to Kokkos SIMD

  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{basic\_simd\& operator/=(basic\_simd\&, U\&\&)}
    \item \texttt{basic\_simd\& operator>>=(basic\_simd\&, U\&\&)}
    \item \texttt{basic\_simd\& operator<<=(basic\_simd\&, U\&\&)}
  \end{itemize}

  \vspace{5pt}
  
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{T reduce\_min(const basic\_simd\& x)}
    \item \texttt{T reduce\_max(const basic\_simd\& x)}
    \item \texttt{T reduce(const basic\_simd\& x, const mask\_type\& mask, T identity\_element, BinaryOperation binary\_op)}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item Supported binary operations are: std::plus, std::multiplies, std::bit\_and, std::bit\_or and std::bit\_xor

>         \item std::plus is used if binary op is not specified

Reviewer: Do we only support function objects from the standard library or also Kokkos:: ones?

Reviewer 3: Currently, only the std:: ones (arbitrary objects should be supported there is a bug I just noticed)

      \end{itemize}
  \end{itemize}

\end{frame}
%==========================================================================

> \begin{frame}[fragile]{Avoid storing a view in RandomAccessIterator}

Reviewer: RandomAccessIterator is in `Impl::` so we will need to find some other way of explaining that sort got faster

Reviewer: Same comment about including performance numbers

Reviewer 5: Using the same benchmark described in https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7304, I just quickly tested it for `Kokkos::reverse_copy` and `Kokkos::find`, but I could not observe any notable changes in runtime before and after https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7304.
Fixes to Kokkos sort runtime performance was already covered during last release briefing, so I'm not sure if it should be mentioned again.

Author: @ldh4 on what was that calculated?

Reviewer 5: @JBludau Host only build with gcc on Skylake.
I think it's going to be best to communicate during the briefing that this change in `RandomAccessIterator` does not necessarily improve runtime all algorithms like it shows in search.

Author: I added a hint in https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-tutorials/pull/125/commits/a66044d5ead770f6f8056955603ea7366b2ea8b0

  In Kokkos 4.5, \texttt{Kokkos::sort} was changed to use raw pointers on host
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Resolves performance issue of \texttt{Kokkos::sort} on host when using \texttt{RandomAccessIterator}
    \item Caused by reference counting and view access in \texttt{RandomAccessIterator}
  \end{itemize}

  \vspace{10pt}
  
  Following revisions are made in Kokkos 4.6
  \begin{itemize} 
    \item Reverted previous changes in \texttt{Kokkos::sort}
    \item Replaced views with raw pointers in \texttt{RandomAccessIterator} instead
    \begin{itemize}
      \item Prevents \texttt{RandomAccessIterator} from participating in view reference counting
    \end{itemize}
  \end{itemize}

\end{frame}
%==========================================================================
\begin{frame}[fragile]{Print support for system allocated memory}

>   \texttt{print\_configuration} outputs if system allocated memory is accessible on GPU

Reviewer: Fine but to be clear we do not make any promise on the format

Author: done in https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-tutorials/pull/125/commits/bc29a03d2e6c3ac4529bf8243849587170e0f9b9

  \vspace{5pt}

>   \begin{code}

Reviewer: Highlight whatever part you want to stand out

Author: I removed everything that was there before so it only are 4 lines. I also added a comment that this is an exemplary output for MI300A on HIP
https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-tutorials/pull/125/commits/c923ca392906d6d8efabe8cd30578ae8e9989cc0

%==========================================================================

\begin{frame}[fragile]

  {\Huge General Enhancements}

  \vspace{10pt}

\end{frame}

%==========================================================================

% Examples

% note: always keep the [fragile] for your frames!

%\begin{frame}[fragile]{Example list}
%  \begin{itemize}
%      \item Item 1
%      \item Item 2 with some \texttt{code}
%      \begin{itemize}
%        \item Sub-item 2.1
%        \item Sub-item 2.2
%      \end{itemize}
%  \end{itemize}
%\end{frame}

%\begin{frame}[fragile]{Example code}
%    \begin{code}[keywords={std}]
%        #include <iostream>
%        
%        int main() {
%            std::cout << "hello world\n";
%        }
%    \end{code}
%\end{frame}

%\begin{frame}[fragile]{Example table}
%    \begin{center}
%        \begin{tabular}{l|l}
%            a & b \\\hline
%            c & d
%        \end{tabular}
%    \end{center}
%\end{frame}

%==========================================================================

\begin{frame}[fragile]{Fix a warning from kokkos\_check}
 \begin{itemize}

>     \item \texttt{kokkos\_check}: makes sure that Kokkos was built with the requested backends and target architectures and generates a fatal error if it was not.

Author: ```suggestion
    \item \texttt{kokkos\_check}: Check at configure time that Kokkos was built with the requested backends and target architectures. Throws a fatal error otherwise.
```

    \item Fix a warning when a user calls the cmake function \texttt{kokkos\_check} from a \texttt{<PackageName>Config.cmake} file
    {\tiny \begin{verbatim}
CMake Warning (dev) at /usr/share/cmake-3.22/Modules/FindPackageHandleStandardArgs.cmake:438 (message):
  The package name passed to `find_package_handle_standard_args`
  (Kokkos_DEVICES) does not match the name of the calling package (SomePackage).
  This can lead to problems in calling code that expects `find_package`
  result variables (e.g., `_FOUND`) to follow a certain pattern.
Call Stack (most recent call first):
  ... /kokkos/lib/cmake/Kokkos/KokkosConfigCommon.cmake:110 (find_package_handle_standard_args)
  ...
This warning is for project developers.  Use -Wno-dev to suppress it.
    \end{verbatim}}
 \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]{\texttt{inclusive\_scan} performance improvements}

>   With the Cuda and HIP backends, \texttt{Kokkos::Experimental::inclusive\_scan} now calls the vendor versions from Thrust

Author: ```suggestion
  With the Cuda and HIP backends, \texttt{Kokkos::Experimental::inclusive\_scan} now calls the vendor versions in Thrust
```

  \begin{itemize}

>      \item The vendor versions are faster than the \texttt{Kokkos::parallel\_scan} based default implementation

Author: ```suggestion
     \item The vendor versions are faster than the \texttt{Kokkos::parallel\_scan}-based default implementation
```

     \item Both backends call the vendor versions by default
       \begin{itemize}

>          \item The HIP version is called when \texttt{Kokkos\_ENABLE\_ROCTHRUST} is \texttt{ON} (which is the default)

Author: ```suggestion
         \item Thrust requires \texttt{Kokkos\_ENABLE\_ROCTHRUST} to be \texttt{ON} (which is the default)
```

       \end{itemize}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]{Reduce tooling interface overhead}
  Reduced the overhead of Kokkos tools related checks
  \begin{itemize}

>       \item Store the information whether Kokkos tools are enabled after each modification to the tools callbacks

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Store the information whether Kokkos tools are enabled after each modification to the tools' callbacks
```

>       \item Previously, this value was recomputed everytime an event of interest (\texttt{parallel\_for}, \texttt{fence}, etc.) occured

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Previously, this value was recomputed for every event (\texttt{parallel\_for}, \texttt{fence}, etc.)
```

>       \item Mostly noticeable in small serial kernels (around 100 elements)

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Most noticeable in small serial kernels (around 100 elements)
```

  \texttt{print\_configuration} outputs if system allocated memory is accessible on GPU

  \vspace{5pt}

  \begin{code}
    Device Execution Space:
      KOKKOS_ENABLE_HIP: yes
    HIP Options:
      KOKKOS_ENABLE_HIP_RELOCATABLE_DEVICE_CODE: no
    
    Runtime Configuration:
      ...

    Kokkos::HIP[ 0 ] gcnArch gfx942:sramecc+:xnack+, Total Global Memory: 94.08 GiB,
    Shared Memory per Block: 64 KiB,
    APU or dGPU: APU, Is Large Bar: 1, Supports Managed Memory: 1,
    XNACK environment variable set: yes
    Kernel reports HMM module via `CONFIG_HMM_MIRROR=y` in `/boot/config`: yes
    Architecture capable of accessing system allocated memory: 1,
    System allows accessing system allocated memory on GPU: 1,
    Wavefront Size: 64 : Selected
  \end{code}
    
    % macro  KOKKOS_ENABLE_HIP : defined
    % macro  HIP_VERSION = 60342134 = version 6.3.42134
    % macro KOKKOS_ENABLE_ROCTHRUST : defined
    % macro KOKKOS_ENABLE_IMPL_HIP_MALLOC_ASYNC: yes
    % Kokkos::HIP[ 0 ] gcnArch gfx942:sramecc+:xnack+, Total Global Memory: 94.08 GiB,
    % Shared Memory per Block: 64 KiB,
    % APU or dGPU: APU, Is Large Bar: 1, Supports Managed Memory: 1,
\end{frame}

> %==========================================================================

Author: Hmm not sure if I would give this so much room. The problem is, that it might raise more questions than we like. As CUDA and HIP allow directly accessing system allocated memory on the gpu users might be curious and start asking questions. 
Maybe it is best just mention this as a small sidenote ... especially since the detection we do for HIP might not work in containers and if it does it is no guarantee

Reviewer 5: Do you suggest any changes on the slide? I agree that we shouldn't go into too much detail into this when presenting. It's probably sufficient to simply mention that a line has been added to the output of `print_configuration()` and move on.

Author: I did not suggest changes. Yeah, I would be fine with saying that we try to detect if the gpu can access system allocated memory and include this info in our print
